specification: CoVE-IO theory of operations (#18)
riscv-non-isa/riscv-ap-tee-io: specification/theory_operations.adoc

[[theory_operations]]

== Theory of Operations

The CoVE-IO specification extends the CoVE host and guest SBI extensions to
allow TVMs to establish trust with TEE-IO devices, and then use and interact
with those devices. Untrusted domain components are responsible for assigning
TEE-IO devices to TVMs, and also for supporting the TVM acceptance or rejection
of the assigned devices. The TSM, on the other hand, establishes and maintains
the secure physical and logical links between TVMs and their assigned devices.

The following sections describe the functionality of the TSM provided CoVE-IO
extensions to support trusted I/O on CoVE enabled platforms.

=== Platform Initialization

==== IOMMU Registration and Setup

The TSM relies on the availability of at least one IOMMU instance exclusvely
associated with the TSM trusted domain. Those IOMMUs allow the TSM to perform
address translations and protection from DMA and interrupts originating from
assigned TDIs. Only the TSM can access and program he trusted domain IOMMU
instances.

> Trusted domain assigned IOMMUs can generate MSIs in order to signal the TSM

Author: Done, thanks.

about command completions, transaction faults or device page requests. Those
MSIs target system physical memory, which is owned by the untrusted domain
manager, e.g. the host VMM. As a consequence, it is the untrusted domain
responsibility to reserve the MSI addresses and then rely on the TSM to program
the IOMMUs with those reserved addresses. This IOMMU registration process is

> driven by the untrusted domain manager for all IOMMUs that participate in TEE-IO

Author: Done, thanks.

> and gies as follows:

Author: Done, thanks.

1. The TSM is loaded and provisioned with a CoVE-IO manifest.
2. The untrusted domain manager (e.g. the host VMM) enumerates all platform
   IOMMUs as PCIe devices.

> 3. The untrusted IOMMU driver is loaded and probed.

Author: Agreed. Done now, thanks.

4. The untrusted IOMMU driver allocates MSI vectors for the trusted domain
   IOMMUs. Those vectors must point to the untrusted IOMMU driver as the TSM can
   not handle external interrupts.
5. The untrusted domain manager registers the IOMMUs with the TSM by calling
   the `sbi_covh_register_iommu()` COVH function. The TSM gets the allocated MSI
   vectors and configures the trusted IOMMU `s_msi_cfg_table` register
   accordingly.
6. When a trusted IOMMU sends an MSI, the untrusted IOMMU driver handles it and
   notifies the TSM about a pending trusted IOMMU MSI by calling the
   `sbi_covh_notify_iommu_msi()` COVH function.
7. The TSM verifies that there is a pending MSI by reading the IOMMU `s_ipsr`
   register, and handles the interrupts as needed.

> The untrusted driver can trick the TSM by either invoking the

Author: Done, thanks.

`sbi_covh_notify_iommu_msi()` COVH function while there are no pending MSI from
the trusted IOMMU or not invoking it when there actually is one such pending
interrupt. In the former case, the TSM can verify that there really is a pending

> MSI by checking the trusted IOMMU status registers. The latter case could cause

Reviewer: have we introduced what we mean by "trusted IOMMU status registers"?

Author: We have not, I'll rephrase.

> a denial of service, which is not covered by the confidential computing threat

Reviewer: ```suggestion
a denial of service, which is not in scope of the confidential computing threat
```

Author: Done, thanks.

a given RP. As the overall platform resources owner, the untrusted domain
software stack must register a RP for TEE I/O and IDE ownership with the TSM, by
calling the `sbi_covh_register_rp()` COVH function. This function associates a
RP id to its MMIO space (for the IDE capability configurations) and all the MMIO
ranges that are routed through it. The TSM must compare these 2 arguments with
the information it received from the platform RoT through the TEE I/O manifest.
If both match, it can proceed into establishing an SPDM session with the RP.

===== SPDM Session

For each TDI that gets attached to a TVM, its corresponding PCIe root port must
be configured with per-device IDE keys. This configuration is done through the
PCIe IDE key management protocol (IDE_KM) that runs on top of an SPDM session.
It is thus necessary to establish an SPDM session with all trusted I/O
registered root ports. This is akin to considering the RP as just another
trusted device for which the DSM is the platform RoT. The SPDM establishment
thus happens between the TSM and the platform RoT. By having the RoT playing the
RP DSM role, the RP vendor-specific IDE key management interface is abstracted

> by the RoT.

Reviewer: do we have a figure for this?

                                                   TDISP, IDE_KM).
|===

In this document, for readability reasons, flow definitions that involve SPDM
based exchanges are simplified and do not include the above described flow
between the TSM, the untrusted domain manager and the SPDM responder. In
particular, the steps that cover the SPDM request generation from the TSM, the
transmission to the host VMM, the transmission to the SPDM responder and finally
the path back to the TSM are reduced into 2 steps:

1. TSM sends SPDM request #1
2. TSM receives SPDM response #1

For example the above example would be described through those simplified steps:

1. VMM calls `sbi_covh_initiate_tee_io_action()`
2. TSM sends request #1
3. TSM receives response #1
4. TSM sends request #2
5. TSM receives response #2
6. TSM notifies host VMM that `tee_io_action()` is complete

==== Secure SPDM Session

.SPDM Session
[source,mermaid]
....
%%{init: {'theme': 'neutral', 'themeVariables': {'darkMode': true}, "flowchart" : { "curve" : "basis" } } }%%
sequenceDiagram

autonumber

participant VMM as Untrusted Domain Manager (VMM)
participant TSM
participant DSM as Device DSM or RoT

> VMM ->> TSM: [COVH] - sbi_covh_create_spdm_session()

Reviewer 2: It is a good start.

We may consider how to enable IDE e.g. IDE_KM protocol.

particular, the steps that cover the SPDM request generation from the TSM, the
transmission to the host VMM, the transmission to the SPDM responder and finally
the path back to the TSM are reduced into 2 steps:

1. TSM sends SPDM request #1
2. TSM receives SPDM response #1

For example the above example would be described through those simplified steps:

1. VMM calls `sbi_covh_tee_io_action()`
2. TSM sends SPDM request #1
3. TSM receives SPDM response #1
4. TSM sends SPDM request #2
5. TSM receives SPDM response #2
6. TSM returns `sbi_covh_tee_io_action()`

==== Secure SPDM Session

.SPDM Session
[source,mermaid]
....
%%{init: {'theme': 'neutral', 'themeVariables': {'darkMode': true}, "flowchart" : { "curve" : "basis" } } }%%
sequenceDiagram

autonumber

participant VMM as Untrusted Domain Manager (VMM)
participant TSM
participant DSM as Device DSM or RoT

VMM ->> TSM: [COVH] - sbi_covh_create_spdm_session()

Note over VMM,DSM: TSM: SPDM Connection Setup

TSM ->> TSM: Generate SPDM request: GET_VERSION
TSM ->> VMM: [COVH] - spdm_req(GET_VERSION)
VMM ->> DSM: [DOE] - SPDM_GET_VERSION
DSM ->> VMM: [DOE] - SPDM_VERSION
VMM ->> TSM: [COVH] - spdm_resp(VERSION)

> TSM ->> TSM: Generate SPDM request: GET_CAPS

Reviewer 2: I recommend we use the name aligning with SPDM specification. E.g.
GET_CAPS => GET_CAPABILITIES
CAPS => CAPABILITIES
NEGOTIATE_ALGS => NEGOTIATE_ALGORITHMS
ALGS => ALGORITHMS
KEY_RESP => KEY_EXCHANGE_RSP
FINISH_RESP => FINISH_RSP

Author: Done, thanks.

TSM ->> VMM: [COVH] - spdm_req(GET_CAPS)
VMM ->> DSM: [DOE] - SPDM_GET_CAPS
DSM ->> VMM: [DOE] - CAPS
VMM ->> TSM: [COVH] - spdm_resp(CAPS)

TSM ->> TSM: Generate SPDM request: NEGOTIATE_ALGS
TSM ->> VMM: [COVH] - spdm_req(NEGOTIATE_ALGS)
VMM ->> DSM: [DOE] - SPDM_NEGOTIATE_ALGS
DSM ->> VMM: [DOE] - ALGS
VMM ->> TSM: [COVH] - spdm_resp(ALGS)

TSM ->> TSM: Generate SPDM request: GET_CERTIFICATE
TSM ->> VMM: [COVH] - spdm_req(GET_CERTIFICATE)
VMM ->> DSM: [DOE] - GET_CERTIFICATE
DSM ->> VMM: [DOE] - CERTIFICATE
VMM ->> TSM: [COVH] - spdm_resp(CERTIFICATE)
TSM ->> TSM: Verify and store device certificate chain

Note over VMM,DSM: TSM: SPDM Key Exchange

TSM ->> TSM: Generate ephemeral SPDM keys K0
TSM ->> TSM: Generate SPDM request: KEY_EXCHANGE(K0)
TSM ->> VMM: [COVH] - spdm_req(KEY_EXCHANGE)
VMM ->> DSM: [DOE] - SPDM_KEY_EXCHANGE
DSM ->> VMM: [DOE] - KEY_RESP
VMM ->> TSM: [COVH] - spdm_resp(KEY_RESP)
TSM ->> TSM: Derive DHE secret
TSM ->> TSM: Generate SPDM request: FINISH
TSM ->> VMM: [COVH] - spdm_req(FINISH)
VMM ->> DSM: [DOE] - SPDM_FINISH
DSM ->> VMM: [DOE] - FINISH_RESP
VMM ->> TSM: [COVH] - spdm_resp(FINISH_RESP)

> Note over VMM,DSM: TSM: SPDM Session Created

Reviewer 2: When do you think we need to call SPDM GET_MEASUREMENTS?

In this API, or separate API?

TSM ->> VMM: [COVH] - spdm_session_created()
....

> === Device Initialization

Reviewer 2: I feel SPDM session should be part of "Device Initialization".

"Platform Initialization" should handle host side only (such as IOMMU), but not device side.

[[theory_operations]]

== Theory of Operations

The CoVE-IO specification extends the CoVE host and guest SBI extensions to
allow TVMs to establish trust with TEE-IO devices, and then use and interact

> with those devices. Untrusted domain components are responsible for assigning

Reviewer: ```suggestion
with those devices. Untrusted supervisor domain components are responsible for assigning
```

TEE-IO devices to TVMs, and also for supporting the TVM acceptance or rejection
of the assigned devices. The TSM, on the other hand, establishes and maintains
the secure physical and logical links between TVMs and their assigned devices.

> The following sections describe the functionality of the TSM provided CoVE-IO

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The following sections describe the functionality of the TSM-provided CoVE-IO
```

> extensions to support trusted I/O on CoVE enabled platforms.

Author: Done, thanks.

[[theory_operations]]

== Theory of Operations

The CoVE-IO specification extends the CoVE host and guest SBI extensions to
allow TVMs to establish trust with TEE-IO devices, and then use and interact
with those devices. Untrusted supervisor domain components are responsible for
assigning TEE-IO devices to TVMs, and also for supporting the TVM acceptance or
rejection of the assigned devices. The TSM, on the other hand, establishes and
maintains the secure physical and logical links between TVMs and their assigned
devices.

The following sections describe the functionality of the TSM-provided CoVE-IO
extensions to support trusted I/O on CoVE-enabled platforms.

=== Platform Initialization

==== IOMMU Registration and Setup

> 

Author: Add non-normative sections related to IOMMU spec

associated with the TSM supervisor domain. Those IOMMUs allow the TSM to enforce
the integrity of address translations and protection from DMA into confidential
memory, as well as  interrupts originating from assigned TDIs. The host
supervisor domain may assign one or more IOMMU instances to the TSM supervisor
domain, after which, only the TSM can access and program the assigned IOMMU
instances.

IOMMUs assigned to the TSM security domain may generate MSIs in order to signal
the TSM about command completions, transaction faults or device page requests.
Those MSIs target system physical memory, which is owned by the host security
domain manager, e.g. the host VMM. As a consequence, it is the host security
domain's responsibility to reserve the MSI addresses and then rely on the TSM to
program the IOMMUs with those reserved addresses. This IOMMU registration
process is driven by the untrusted domain manager for all IOMMUs that
participate in TEE-IO and operates as described in the following steps:

1. The TSM is loaded into a supervisor domain and provisioned with a CoVE-IO
   manifest. It is recommended that the TSM is measured by the platform

>    root-of-trust for subsequent attestation.

Reviewer 2: Question: Why TSM is measured by platform RoT, but not silicon RoT (CPU)?

Reviewer: perhaps we should say SoC RoT?

Reviewer 2: I think it depends on who is Root-of-Trust for measurement (RTM), and who loads TSM.
If TSM is loaded by host CPU, the SoC RoT makes more sense.
Unless TSM is really loaded by platform RoT, then platform RoT needs to measure it. And the platform RoT also needs to guarantee that the one CPU executing on is the same as the one loaded and measured by Platform RoT.

If we support both use case, then we can generalize it by saying: TSM is measured by Root-of-Trust for measurement (RTM). Maybe...

such pending interrupt. In the former case, the TSM can verify that there really
is a pending MSI by checking the trusted IOMMU status registers. The latter case
could cause a denial of service, which is not in scope of the confidential
computing threat model. If the TSM must ensure that a given command is completed
without having to rely on untrusted IOMMU driver MSI notifications, it can queue
an `IOFENCE.C` command after the desired command and check for the `cqh`
advancing past the `IOFENCE.C` command index.

==== PCIe Root Port Registration

When the data link between the TDI and the TVM must be secured, trusted I/O
relies on the PCIe IDE protocol. IDE provides confidentiality and integrity
protection for TLPs received and transmitted between the physical device the TDI
belongs to and its assigned PCIe root port (RP). Both endpoints (The RP and the
physical device) must be configured with the same encryption keys through the
IDE key management protocols and have their IDE PCIe extended capability
configured as well.

As described in the threat model and requirement sections, the following trusted
I/O rules apply:

> * As PCIe switches are outside of the TVM TCB, only selective IDE streams are

Author: Do we need to program the switches when using selective IDE streams?

Reviewer 2: For example, IDE has register - "IDE Control Register (Offset 08h)"
BIT2 - **Flow-Through IDE Stream Enable** - For Switch Ports and Root Ports, Enables the Port for flow-through operation of TLPs associated with Selective IDE streams.

  used to protect the PCIe link between the TVM and the TDI.

> * A single selective IDE stream is established between the TSM and the physical

Author: Fixed, thanks.
